---
title: People
language: en
layout: default
latexmath: true
---

# Upcoming Seminars

No seminars are currently scheduled.

# Past Seminars

## Adaptive Wavelet Quantile Density Estimation Based on Biased Samples

### Hassan Doosti, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

#### 24th April 2025

Abstract: Quantile density functions offer critical insights in fields
ranging from economics to biomedical studies. However, their accurate
estimation becomes challenging when data is biased or irregularly
sampled. This talk presents a comparative evaluation of threshold
selection methods—specifically hard and block thresholding—in adaptive
wavelet-based quantile density estimation under such conditions. By
integrating theoretical analysis grounded in minimax risk over Besov
spaces and extensive simulation studies, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of block thresholding in achieving optimal convergence
rates, even in the presence of bias. Applications to real-world data
further highlight the practical advantages of the proposed
methodology. The findings provide actionable guidance for
statisticians and data scientists dealing with biased data and looking
for robust, adaptive estimation strategies.

* * * *

## Three-dimensional statistical inference using z-stacks of two-dimensional images of oral microbiome samples

### Suman Majumder, ISRU, ISI Kolkata

#### 16th April 2025

Abstract: The intra- and inter-taxon relationships present between
different bacteria in human oral samples has been of interest to
researchers for quite some time. The problem is similar to determining
interspecies relationships between different animals in a region with
some key challenges and restrictions. Spatial analysis of images of
saliva or dental plaque samples allows us to quantify these
relationships and the attached uncertainties. Such analyses are few in
numbers and primarily utilize two-dimensional methods and infer about
these relationships in a two-dimensional plane, followed by some sort
of meta-analysis to infer over a collection of “slices” from a sample.
In this talk, I will talk about challenges of using spatial analysis
in microbiome image data, discuss how we can perform three-dimensional
joint analysis of these “slices” using two-dimensional spatial
isotropic models, and present more challenges we would need to deal
with to make the model statistically prudent.

* * * *

## High-dimensional Inference using Random Projections

### Minerva Mukhopadhyay, ISRU, ISI Kolkata

#### 3rd April 2025

Abstract: With increasing availability of data, nowadays, we often
encounter high-dimensional data from various fields of study. Almost
all standard multivariate approaches fail in effectively analysing
such data, both theoretically as well as computationally. Dimension
reduction techniques are an essential pre-processing step towards
dealing with such data. Among existing methods, the random projection
ensemble approach has proven to be a promising approach. In this talk,
we plan to discuss the fundamentals of random projections and some of
its improvements that have been proposed in the literature. We will
also explore implementations of random projections in some specific
methods of classification and density estimation.

* * * *

## Spectra of random hypergraphs and contractions of random tensors

### Soumendu Sundar Mukherjee, SMU, ISI Kolkata

#### 5th December 2024

Abstract: We will discuss some results on the limit spectra of adjacency and Laplacian matrices of r-uniform Erdős-Rényi hypergraphs on n vertices, in an asymptotic regime where r/n → c ∈ [0,1). Unlike the case of Erdős-Rényi random graphs, the entries of hypergraph adjacency matrices exhibit long range correlations, which make spectral analysis more challenging. Using an ANOVA-style representation, we are able to obtain many results, including a Baik-Ben Arous-Péché phase transition for the largest eigenvalue at r = 3: An appropriately scaled largest eigenvalue converges in probability to 2 if r ∈ {2,3}, and to √(r-2) + 1/√(r-2), if r ≥ 4. Time permitting, we will discuss some related results on contractions of random tensors, which show up in the context of tensor PCA and when studying the so-called p-spin spherical spin glass.

This talk will be based on several joint works with Dipranjan Pal and Himasish Talukdar, both PhD students at ISI Kolkata.

* * * *

## MCMC Importance Sampling via Moreau-Yosida Envelopes

### Dootika Vats, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, IIT Kanpur

#### 18th November 2024 

Abstract: Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is the workhorse
computational algorithm employed for inference in Bayesian
statistics. Gradient-based MCMC algorithms are known to yield faster
converging Markov chains.  In modern parsimonious models, the use of
non-differentiable priors is fairly standard, yielding
non-differentiable posteriors. Without differentiability,
gradient-based MCMC algorithms cannot be employed
effectively. Recently proposed proximal MCMC approaches, however, can
partially remedy this limitation. These approaches employ the
Moreau-Yosida (MY) envelope to smooth the nondifferentiable prior
enabling sampling from an approximation to the target posterior. In
this work, we leverage properties of the MY envelope to construct an
importance sampling paradigm to correct for this approximation
error. We establish asymptotic normality of the importance sampling
estimators with an explicit expression for the asymptotic variance
which we use to derive a practical metric of sampling
efficiency. Numerical studies show that the proposed scheme can yield
lower variance estimators compared to existing proximal MCMC
alternatives.


